---
layout: post
title:  "Policy about non-developer naming"
date:   2025-04-01 10:00:00 +0200
categories: english
---
As a part of the ISO27001 certification, Section 4.3 "Determining the scope of the information security management system", our systems and definitions need to have a clear terminology when addressing information scoping and how to define the intended audience.
 
When analysing the current terminology, a gap in how we define two important information scope audiences was found. The gap is regarding the definition of a Developer vs. a Non-Developer in our organisation.
 
The Merriam-Webster definition of a Developer is:

> : one that develops: such as,
> a: a chemical used to develop exposed photographic materials
>
> b: a person who develops real estate
>
> c: a person or company that develops computer software

Since we can't really state that non-developers, that is anyone that does not write or test code, is not a developer according to this definition, a new definition for those in the organisation that is a part of the development, but not being a software developer have to be defined.
 
The term that from now on will be used for anyone outside the Development & Test organisation and for persons that does not have commit rights, don't know how to write a unit test, never opened Test Link or run any program in Dark Mode is from now on a duggle.
 
## Definition of a Duggle
 
In the world of technology and programming, a "Duggle" refers to an individual who does not possess the ability to write or develop software. Similar to how the term "Muggle" in the Harry Potter universe describes those without magical abilities, a Duggle exists in the ordinary, non-coding world, typically unaware of the intricate languages and frameworks that software developers use to create digital solutions.
 
Duggles may use technology extensively in their daily lives but remain blissfully unaware of the complex code running beneath the surface of their applications and devices. While they might marvel at technological advancements, they lack the specialized knowledge to conjure programs or debug issues themselves.
 
Despite this, many Duggles lead fulfilling lives in various non-programming professions, from product management to zoologists, contributing to society in ways that don't involve writing a single line of code.
 
Unlike the occasionally derogatory connotation in the wizarding world, the term "Duggle" in tech circles is typically used with good humor to describe the vast majority of the population who simply have other talents and interests beyond software development.

 